---
title: "Bachelors Project"
description: "Bachelor's project."
pubDate: "May 15 2026"
heroImage: "/projects/engineering/fulmair-cad-assembly.png"
blurb: "ML photometric identification of high-redshift galaxies."
tag: "phys"
---

We look for galaxies with high redshifts (i.e., old galaxies) to get a historic account of the early universe - composition, dynamics, and physical conditions. These objects are so dim that measuring their redshifts using precise spectra is increasingly difficult, and the extensive search would be too time-consuming. Instead we approximate galaxy spectra using brightnesses in different wavelength filters - like imaging in RGB. We can image thousands of galaxies at once, approximate spectra using the small set of brightnesses, and estimate redshift using spectral features. This is much quicker and can detect dimmer galaxies, but introduce many scientific biases in the filtering of data and approximation of spectra to find redshift.

My task was to perform this task using JWST imaging, and to automate the process using machine learning (ML). This would serve to reduce (human) scientific biases and speed up the search for high-redshift galaxies (automated data filtering, processing, and analysis). 

I chose to construct a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), which could direct digest image data and output redshift predictions, contrasting other algorithms that require some (potentially biased) feature pre-extraction before using the ML algorithm. To establish an enormous training dataset for the CNN to learn from, I decided to use physical data from the JAGUAR collaboration, which computationally simulated galaxies and extracted their physical properties. This gives the CNN perfect information about redshifts to train upon. I then updated JWST's MIRAGE code - which simulates images from the telescope using leading physical models - to restore functionality to the code. I produced simulated JWST images of ~250,000 galaxies were using the University of Melbourne's SPARTAN HPC cluster, which were processed into scientifically usable forms using the JWST image reduction pipeline and then fed into the CNN. The CNN was then trained on this dataset of 250,000 galaxies, and then statistically evaluated using test with simulated images and real images.

The CNN was able to classify galaxy redshifts between 0 and 14.5, with a mean squared error (MSE) of 0.57 when tested upon simulated images. Unfortunately, this performance did not translate to real JWST imaging tests, for which the MSE rose drastically to 6.372.

The difference in performance points to some difference between simulated imaging and real imaging - the CNN overfit itself on simulated data, and then could not generalise itself to real imaging. The exact cause of this remains unknown, however it can likely be attributed to either the quality of JAGUAR data production, or MIRAGE code quality. The former implies that leading models might not be able to fully model galaxy properties, and the latter implies that JWST image simulations might not accurately model JWST imaging. Given the work undertaken on this project to update the MIRAGE code to a usable state, this conclusion is not unlikely. A positive outcome of this project was that the CNN could clearly measure redshifts of galaxies generated by leading models - the ML algorithm recreated these models to a good accuracy. Thus CNNs show future promise for automation of galaxy redshift measurements.
